Infectious Diseases Data Observatory: IDDO

jonathan
- supervised ML approach to determine best imputation methods
preferred imputation method PER feature: better than chance
- clustering approach to determine preferred imputation methods
add missingness indicator for each row: not better than chance
- most valuables feature to collect to improve missingness score
build some scores: importance in prediction 
+ missingness relative to target feature
+ imputation error
+ absolute correlation with target feature
--> large score = valuable to collect more of this feature
: good results
weighting of the score: equal
before clustering, 
tried different reduction techniques, 
not just pca but tsne, mds, etc....


curated dataset

felix
personalized collabortive Ml
collaborative ML = allows different agents to train collectively 
...without sharing data!
federated learning: bilateral communication through 1 server
decentralized learning: each participant sends messages to a subset of all participants
it's possible to learn the same model with this.
- individual data sets too small
1 agent trains 1 model on their dataset
weight erosion = update aggregation scheme: intervenes after the server
... has received updates from each agent
--> federated averaging
euclidean distance between different agents' loss function level sets
take the closest ones for update
however distance depends on minibatch and how well the model is already performing
--> weighted federated averaging
dont include negative contributions by any agent
for now: on "simple models" and "small, simple datasets"...
room for improvement, and also room for issues.
Why also focus on deep learning models : medical images....
goal = model personalization

what about multimodal data? ebola dataset
ISEREC: defined standardized forms: 100k patient data something like that
also 20k patient data with other forms
also 60k patient data just came in but more like epidata (not enough information/features) just from SA i believe
ALL of it = tabular
but comes from all over the world... = great

ibm: sanke diagram: SHOULD NOT BE USED for individual decision making!
not enough evidence in using this type of tools (yet)
us: guide decision making for individuals
BUT you dont want to create a self-proving prophecy...
YOU WANT risk stratification; use it as a suppport tool
(this is your prior, etc)
part of the issue might be that people develop tools that doctors dont really want / need
--> really need to be in contact with a "population" of doctors not just the opinion of one or two
--> would be way more reliable if you had uncertainty measures on the results
however this tool = bayesian approach = doctors logic....
it fits! just do it better, using ML and data science!
of course its gonna be context based, just like doctors are
--> personalized model approach is the way to go
motivation for personalization: 
how the model is developped and applied  = clinicians choice

theo
