Unified Approach to Interpret Machine Learning Model SHAP + LIME - Layla Yang (Data bricks)

- what is Ml : math formula applied to data points.
model "learns" by aiming to reduce the error between its predictions and the labels (supervised)
but what about interpretation? for linear models, it is pretty easy. Let's take an example: this disease that is correlated with age. 
Young people have it less, with age it increases. Straight forward interpretation: there is positive correlation between the two variables.
What about non linear problems? These constitute most of the problems at hand...
accuracy interpretability tradeoff: performance vs. explanation interpretation . Remember: interpretability is for HUMANS... so accuracy and such are useful but not great.
obviously trust in the model is important, also what if it messes up? this happens of course. We want to be able to know beforehand, or at least afterwards
even if it doesnt mess up: we want to know why the model made the decision it did!
also important : for people who don't understand: can give insight as to which features to collect more of, and which features to engineer in which way!
Ml picks up bias in the data!

tree interpreter: feature importance: measures how often and how much a feature was used in the model... but only GLOBAL average... 
Also it is only "relative" importance meaning importance relative to the other features NOT relative to the target you want to predict...
This is because basically it looks at "splits" between tree branches and the prediction these splits lead to .


LIME: doesnt work out of the box on all models... learned on perturbations of the original datapoint + locally weighted regression
SHAP values isaverage contribution of features which are predicting in different situation
Can use LIME + Shapley values which is the KERNEL explainer (vs TREE explainer, DEEP explainer, GRADIENT explainer).
SHAP guarantees local consistency, is better overall but computes a set of shapley values for each ROW  of the data... can take a long time
should probably use spark for this ... 